This project is inspiried by the movie "Moneyball" with Brad Pitt and Jonah Hill. The project starts with a train dataset of 2276 observations and 17 variables. Each record represents a professional baseball team from the year 1871 to 2006 inclusive. Each record has the performance of the team for the given year, with all of the statistics adjusted to match the performance of a 162-game season.

The first stage of the project is data exploration, which identifies six variables with missing value issues and nine variables with outlier issues. 

The second stage of the project is data preparation, which is divided into two parts. The first half imputes variables with missing values. Specifically, a flag variable and an imputed variable are created for each of the six variables with missing values. If the variable has normality issue, the median is used to replace the missing records. If the variable doesn’t have normality issue, the mean is used to replace the missing records. The second half of the section addresses outlier issues. For variables with moderate outlier issues, 99% trim is utilized. For variables with more severe outlier issues, a combination of z-standardization and 95% trim is used in the transformation process.

The third stage of the project is model development. The first three models using stepwise, backward, and forward selection methods yield the same result. However, these models contain variables with too much multicollinearity. Therefore, a fourth model is introduced to address the multicollinearity issue. However, this model doesn’t match industry knowledge. Thus, a fifth model is introduced to address that problem. 

The final stage of the project is model evaluation and selection. Three technical metrics are used to evaluate the models: adjusted R-squared, MSE, and AIC. Although model #5 is ranked worst in all three metrics, it’s ultimately chosen for the project because it doesn’t have multicollinearity issue and also matches industry knowledge. 

In the work environment in real life, I have led a project, using a similar approach as the one used in the moneyball assignment, to understand resident satisfaction at properties across the student housing portfolio and identify the correlationship between tenant satisfaction and lease renewal success. As a full stack data scientist, I led this project from start to finish. First, I designed the survey, building each question on the list along with user interface. Second, I took charge of the data collection process by working directly with the property managers and running an internal competition among property managers to raise participation among the residents. Third, I managed the firm's third-party survey partner to send out the surveys to residents and constantly follow up to gain survey responses. Fourth, as the data was collected, I went through a similar process as the one outlined in this project to conduct exploratory data analysis (EDA), clean the data, and develop predictive models. I first conducted a factor analysis to group the independent variables into two groups (leasing experience and maintenance experience). Then I applied OLS regression to predict the renewal percentage of the properties using these two factors. 

I concluded that maintenance experience played a critical role in tenant satisfaction and thus renewal success of the properties. With this key findings in mind, I worked directly with the asset manager of the student housing portfolio to create a reward program for our maintenance staff (called "maintenance hero") across all properties. This is an example of how I was able to turn raw data into information, extract key insights, identify actional intelligence opportunities, execute the plan, and eventually turn data science into tangible business benefits, including higher customer satisfaction and ultimately more profitable bottom line for the firm.  
