The credit card default model in this report is based upon the research aimed at the case of customer default payments in Taiwan. The original study concentrates on comparing the predictive accuracy of probability of default among six data mining methods. However, this study only focuses on developing the most accurate predictive model to forecast default outcome using four predictive models: random forest, gradient boosting, logistic regression with variable selection, and support vector machine (SVM). The measurement metrics used in this study to compare the effectiveness of four models are true positive rate (TPR), false positive rate (FPR), and accuracy.

This study is conducted in multiple phases to approach the problem to develop the most accurate predictive model to forecast default outcome 1) data understanding 2) feature engineering 3) exploratory data analysis (EDA) using traditional and model-based decision tree EDA 4) predictive model development 5) predictive model result comparison. Two major highlights of the study are the facts that model-based decision tree EDA doesn’t produce accurate predictive models and the fact that logistic regression with variable selection is the most accurate method to predict default outcome, using both train and test dataset. It doesn’t overfit the dataset and has a balanced performance among all three metrics on both train and test dataset.

In the real-life scenario, models should be updated every 6 months or at least every year. The project tries to mimic the reality by adding a model monitoring guide and model validation guide to follow. In my work experience in reality, I have conducted a project, using similar approach to this insurance project, to address the deliquency issue at a student housing property in Atlanta, GA. After the data collection and data cleaning process was done, I first ran a logistic regression analysis to identify the true offenders of rent late payers and then ran an OLS regression analysis to predict how much rent the tenants would owe. From key findings as a result of the statistical analysis and predictive modeling, I identified three factors driving deliquency at the property. One of them was the class year of the student tenants as freshmen were more likely to pay rent late. With this key finding in mind, I worked directly with the asset manager of the property to start a financial literacy class with the goal to educate young students on budgeting and financial planning.
