The insurance project has two main goals 1) predict the probability of a customer crashing their car 2) if somebody crashes their car, predict the cost the insurance company has to pay. The project uses the train dataset to build two predictive models (logistic regression model to address the first question and ordinary least square (OLS) regression to address the second question) and the test dataset to apply the predictive models to new data.

The train dataset has 8161 observations with 26 variables. Each record represents a customer at an auto insurance company. Each record has two target variables: TARGET_FLAG and TARGET_AMT. First, TARGET_FLAG indicates whether a customer has a crash with 1 means that the person was in a car crash, and 0 means that the person was not in a car crash. Second, TARGET_AMT shows what it costs the insurance company if the customer has a crash. This value is 0 if the person didn’t crash their car. But if they did, this number will be greater than 0 in the record.

There are five stages project goes through 1) data exploration to understand the data via visuals such as histograms, boxplots, and correlation plot as well as to identify variables with missing value and outlier issues 2) data preparation to address missing value and outlier issues. During this stage, three types of new variables are created: M to show the distinction between missing and known values, IMP to indicate imputed variables for missing values, and Z to show the distinction between records with 0 value and other values 3) logistic regression model development to build four models to forecast TARGET_FLAG variable 4) model selection to compare these four models using different metrics such as AIC, BIC, log likelihood, KS statistic, and AUC under ROC curve. From this comparison, model #4 is selected 5) OLS regression model development to build an OLS regression model to forecast TARGET_AMT.
The next step for this project is to build a stand alone data step that can apply the result in model #4 from section 3 logistic regression model development and OLS model in section 5 OLS regression model development to new datasets. If the predicted mean of the first model is approximately 26% and the predicted mean of the second model is approximately 1500, we conclude that both models are solid since these numbers are the average of the actual TARGET_FLAG and TARGET_AMT in the train dataset.

In my work experience in reality, I have conducted a project, using similar approach to this insurance project, to address the deliquency issue at a student housing property in Atlanta, GA. After the data collection and data cleaning process was done, I first ran a logistic regression analysis to identify the true offenders of rent late payers and then ran an OLS regression analysis to predict how much rent the tenants would owe. From key findings as a result of the statistical analysis and predictive modeling, I identified three factors driving deliquency at the property. One of them was the class year of the student tenants as freshmen were more likely to pay rent late. With this key finding in mind, I worked directly with the asset manager of the property to start a financial literacy class with the goal to educate young students on budgeting and financial planning. 
