This project includes the purpose, methodology, results, and recommendations for DengAI, a competition on drivendata.org. Predictive models are evaluated by submitting them to drivendata.org, which will provide a public score for each model based on a portion of the validation dataset. At the conclusion of the competition, the score will be updated based on the holdout dataset.

The name of the competition DengAI comes from the dengue fever, a mosquito-borne disease that occurs in tropical and sub-tropical parts of the world where mosquito population is bigger than other places around the globe. In mild cases, symptoms are similar to the flu: fever, rash, and muscle and joint pain. In severe cases, dengue fever can cause severe bleeding, low blood pressure, and even death. Historically, the disease has been most prevalent in Southeast Asia and the Pacific Islands. However, in recently years, dengue fever has been spreading. These days many of the nearly half billion cases per year are occurring in South America. As a result, this is a very significant global issue. Being able to predict the cases for a region can help the government and medical staff of that country better prepare and prevent the disease.

This disease also has a personal significant impact on me since I grew up in Vietnam where dengue fever is a real threat and fear of many people, including my family. Every night we covered up our skin and burned incense sticks to keep the mosquitos away to prevent dengue fever.

Because dengue fever is carried by mosquitoes, the transmission dynamics of the disease are related to climate variables. Although the relationship to climate is complex, a growing number of scientists argue that climate change is likely to produce distributional shifts that will have significant public health implications worldwide. Using environmental data describing changes in temperature, precipitation, vegetation, and more, which is collected by various US Federal Government agencies (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration), we will predict the number of dengue fever cases reported each week in Iquitos, Peru and San Juan, Puerto Rico.

The raw data comes in four different files 1) response variable (total cases), city, year, week of the year 2) predictor variables (environmental factors) 3) forecast predictor variables 4) submission template. The first two files are used as train dataset to build the model. The third file is used as the test dataset to generate the forecasts. The fourth file is used to submit the results to drivendata.org. The goal is to predict the total cases label for each (city, year, week of year) in the test set (“iq” is Iquitos and “sj” is San Juan). Iquitos and San Juan have test data spanning three and five years respectively. The test set is a pure future holdout set, which means that test data is sequential and non-overlapping with any of the train data. Missing values have been filled as “NaN.”

Typically, Python is better than R to generate neural networks because with Python, we can specify the number of hidden layers whereas R doesn’t allow this. However, majority of machine learning problems can be solved with only one hidden layer in neural networks, which R supports. We don’t handle complex data and issues such as image processing and natural language processing, so there’s no need to utilize more than one hidden layer. Therefore, R is the chosen program for this project. Six sets of predictive models are developed to forecast total cases, one set for Iquitos and one set for San Juan.

Model #1 naïve method: forecasts are generated based on the last observation

Model #2 seasonal naïve method: forecasts are generated based on the last observations of each season

Model #3 drift method: forecasts are generated by drawing a line between the first and last observations and extrapolating it into the future

Model #4 ARIMA method: use auto.arima() to let R determine the best ARIMA model. The chosen models are ARIMA(1,0,4) for Iquitos and ARIMA(1,1,1) for San Juan

Model #5 neural network method with no Box Cox transformation: use nnetar() and lambda=NULL to let R determine the best neural network model. The chosen models are NNAR(5,1,6)[52] for Iquitos and NNAR(14,1,10)[52] for San Juan

Model #6 neural network method with Box Cox transformation: use nnetar() and lambda=auto to let R determine the best neural network model. The chosen models are NNAR(6,1,6)[52] for Iquitos and NNAR(16,1,12)[52] for San Juan.

In conclusion, this final project walks through the scope, methodology, results, key learnings, and recommendations for predictive models to forecast dengue fever in Iquitos, Peru and San Juan, Puerto Rico. Six models are developed in the analysis. Neural networks model with no Box Cox transformation performs the best on the train set whereas neural networks model with Box Cox transformation performs the best on the test set. It’s evidenced in the results that the predictors are significant to generate prediction for the total cases of dengue fever in the two cities. 

In the work environment in real life, I have gathered time series data of tenant applications and lease signage for the properties across student housing portfolio. I used a similar approach to build a predictive model to forecast occupancy of each property by the end of the leasing season, using historical leasing signage time series data. This is called a "prelease tracker." The final deliverable includes 1) a predictive model to forecast occupancy for each property 2) a KPI dashboard to track leasing progress with financial and operation metrics that got updated every week.
